On Planes and Interdimensional Geometry

It is believed amoung the elves that in the beginning there was nothing. A unity that permiated all existance.

Then at the very first moments of anything that could be considered the universe, this unity was fractured. It is fiercely debated amoung elven scholars and philosophers as to whether the universe was always fractured or if this event was caused by a force beyond understanding. What is generally agreed upon is that this fracturing set up the structure of all material and immaterial planes of existence.

Amoung most of the other sentient races including humans it is believed that Good and Evil are the fundamental components of the universe. The elves know this to be a misconception. After the fracturing the two predominant forces which split were those of Order and Chaos. The tension caused by this separation further fractured the new found vaccum at the center. From this vaccum split off the four elementals. From then on the structure of everything was composed of various strengths of each of these fundamental components. This six elements of nature form an elongated octahedron which the elves hold as a symbol of the all existance.

At this point in history the universe as a whole is filled with these fighting components. Out of this primordial structure its believed that at least one great being arose. This being it is believed tried to give form to the universe. In his first attempts he created series of beings of amazing power which lived in this space with him. However this did not satisfy him. So he created the first material plane at the exact balance point of the 6 elements. Here He and his companions dwelled for some time, but they eventually grew bored and attempts to create more beings such as themselves continually failed. The six secondaries (As those that the One first created are known) Each went out and created their own plane of existence at one of the extremes of universal octohedron. Each realm was amazing in its own right perfectly embodying each of the respective elements. But nothing ever developed that was not of these beings own making. The Original struck upon the idea that pureness was not necessarily the most interesting. 

In a series of experiments with the four "Material" elements which were more open to co-operation some of the most stunning landscapes were created. However they were always static and unmoving. The Original tried adding Order or Chaos to each of these but the result was always disappointing. Order and Chaos where never used together because those two beings could not agree to anything. It is said that one day the Original devised a scheme in order to get both Order and Chaos into a world together. He had the material elements construct the most magnificent world they could and then he offered a competition to both Order and Chaos. The person who made this world the most amazing would win it for themselves. Neither wanting to be undone poured all of their effort into this single world. When they were done the Original looked at the world and was pleased for it was filled with life and vibrance.

Order and Chaos demanded that the Original choose a winner. Instead the Original took that world and broke it into a thousand shards and scattered them into the octahedron. Each one formed a new plane of existence, each with slightly different balance of components. This pieces filled out the octahedron according to alignment. Both Order and Chaos were furious with the Original and together locked him into the First Plane. They both then tried to collect the pieces and rebuild the plane. But neither of them were powerful enough to undo what had been done. Instead they settled into their own dimensions watching the planes and interfering when it suited them. Each believing that if they could control enough of the pieces that they would become powerful enough to reunite the whole.

Earth Air Fire and Water through this understood the Original's goals but not even combined were they strong enough to confront them so they and the secondaries (and eventually tertiaries) took to monitoring the realms and their inhabitants. Sometimes trying to keep balance, some times trying to stir things up. Sometimes just trying to do something to avoid the boredom.

In between the planes of existance is the primordial soup of existance. It is believed be some that when you die you move into a fuzzy image of your plane that surrounds your material realm. Right on the edge as your plane melds into the primordial ether.

These are the beliefs of the Elves who have done the most travelling between realms. Their realm had more chaos then average and as such Magic (which derives from Chaos) was stronger in Aleris. Elduin was originally more blanced towards Order and as such was ruled primarily by the Natural laws... That is until the Catastrophe of Aleris and the Elves creating a portal to Elduin shifted the Balance of the elements in Elduin and introduced magic.